The third type of if statement in Python
is the if elif.
Let me demonstrate the general syntax for
that if statement.
So we have if followed by a relational
expression.
Inside that would be the statements.
And then you'll say, elif and another
relational expression.
Followed by a set of statements, one or
more.
And we can continue with elifs as long as
we need to.
And we'll stop after this one.
And then finally, you can have an optional
else.
The else will execute its statements if,
and we left off a colon right there.
If all of the other relational expressions
are false.
So an example of when you might need a if
elif is with
a grading scale, when you're taking
numeric scores and assigning values.
So for example, greater than 89 is a
letter grade A, using the 90 to 100 scale.
80 to 89 is a B, 70 to 79 is a C,
60 to 69 is a D, and anything below
60, so less than or equal to 59, is an F.
So if you're looking at a numeric score,
you might
say, if grade is greater than 89, letter
grade equals A.
Elif grade is greater than 79, or greater
than or equal to 80, letter grade equals
B.
Elif grade is greater than or equal to 70,
letter grade equals C and so on.
In fact, let's look in Python how to
actually write
that simple little program to demonstrate
how the if elif works.
So let's move to Python.
We'll call this ifelif.py.
So the first thing we're gonna do is say
print, enter a numeric grade.
And then we'll say grade is equal to int,
raw input.
And then we'll say if grade is greater
than or equal to 90, letter grade equals
A.
Elif, and actually I'm gonna take the
parenthesis off this.
If you come from another programming
language in to Python, you'd be
like me and want to always put parentheses
around your relational expressions.
That's not a common idiom in Python, so
trying to follow
the convention of most Python programmers,
I'll take my parentheses off.
It's hard for me to do.
Then we can say, elif grade greater than
or equal to 80, letter grade equals B.
Elif grade greater than, equal to 70,
letter grade equals C.
Elif grade greater than, equal to 60,
letter grade equals D.
Elif grade less than, equal to 59, letter
grade equal F.
Else print did not recognize input.
We'll add this else part for if the user
enters something that's not
in that range or enters some input that's
not a number, for example.
So I have print statement and print and
say your letter grade is, letter grade.
Okay?
So let's exit and save.
And try it, ifelif.py.
I haven't made too many error; this one is
just a typographical error.
I do like to leave them in because you'll
see how I solve these problems.
This is an easy one to fix; I just forgot
to put the
colon right here, so let's add that in
real quick, exit and save again.
Chock full of mistakes today.
Same thing right there.
One more time.
That's the end of the program, so there
shouldn't be too many other errors.
So let's just try a middle grade, 77.
Your letter grade is C.
Let's run it again.
Let's try a high score.
That's good.
Let's run it again.
Let's try.
Now let's try for one more attempt.
Let's try something that's outside the
range, let's try a letter.
In that case, it failed in our input,
which is fine, just trying to show
you what would happen if the user
entered something that was not a
legitimate number.
Later in the course, we'll talk more about
how a handle errors like this.
But I just wanted to demonstrate what
would happen
if the user entered something outside the
range of numbers.
So to review very quickly, we've looked at
the if elif statement as a way to make one
decision based on a large range of
possible values of the input.
And so the example that we used was
turning a numeric grade into a letter
grade.
In the exercises, we'll look at another
example of using if
elif, and in fact, we're ready to move to
the exercises now.
Our first exercise will involve just if
else, but later
on in the exercises, we will work again
with if elif.
So let's move on to the exercises.
[BLANK_AUDIO]